Now that we positioned our first element, let's go back to the layouting.
There are two important other features I want to show you right now.
The first one is one additional unit or value you can use.
Here we got clearly defined values for all four columns.
Now you also got cases where you have a couple of absolute or relative non-fraction units and you simply
want to ensure that the last column or row takes the available remaining space.
Now obviously, you could take one fraction as a value for that
but there also is auto.
So if I set the template row here to auto and I reload, then it actually is only as high as it needs
to be to fit the content in and this is generally the same behavior for the columns, though if you set
it to auto there, it will simply occupy any remaining space.
So if I quickly demonstrate this by setting this here let's say back to, let's say 5rem and then I replace
the last fraction with auto,
then you actually see it takes the full available width and the last column which has a value of auto
is just as big as it needs to be to fill the remaining space.
The same behavior would be true for rows if, if what?
Well if the height of the container,
so of the grid container here was set.
We got no height property there and therefore, auto on the vertical axis
will just take as much space as the content requires because there is no space to fill up because the
overall grid container is just as high as it needs to be to fit its content as defined here in the layout
into itself.
If we were to give that container a height of let's say 500 pixels and I reload,
then you see that auto actually fills that up.
Now we got auto fill up the entire bottom row.
If I remove auto and set this to 2rem instead, then you would see that the grid container
still has its width but the rows don't actually fill it up.
So this is something up to you, something you can configure just as you need it and knowing about auto
and that you can conveniently use it to create or to fill the empty space is super important.
Now one other important feature is that sometimes you don't have four columns with such different widths.
Maybe you want to have four columns but they should all be equally sized,
so let me quickly comment this out and duplicate it
and now let me overwrite this and
let's say we got four columns and each column is 25% or 10rem or whatever you want to have.
So of course, what we can do is we can write 25% four times to create four columns because if I
only write it once, we only get one column.
So now we got four equally sized columns as you can see on the preview at the bottom right
but writing it like this of course is a bit annoying.
There is a helper method you can use which is called repeat, it's a CSS function and it takes two arguments.
The second argument is the pattern it should repeat and the first argument is how often it should repeat it.
So four with this pattern would actually create 16 columns because it repeats four columns with that
width four times,
if I do that, we end up with 16 columns here in the bottom right as you can see but if we remove three
times 25%, now we create four columns with 25% for each of them.
So now we're back to what we had before
but with way less code to write. As I said, this can be any pattern, doesn't have to be just one value
and doesn't have to be percentages, could be pixels, rem, fractions, fractions and pixels mixed, whatever
your requirement is.
So the repeat function is a very useful function for creating grids with the layout we want
quickly. There also is one other helpful function which I want to show you,
let's say here for my template rows here,
I actually want to have a certain minimum and maximum height.
So what we can do for that is we can use a special function which also ships with CSS, the minmax
function.
This function takes two arguments and the first one is to minimum,
minmax not mix, minmax,
so the first value is the minimum height
in this case for the row, for the column it would be the width.
So the minimum height an element should have and the second argument is the maximum height.
So we could say the minimum height should be 10 pixels, maximum should be 200 pixels.
If we save that and reload, then we see that for the second row, it is 200 pixels high,
again keep in mind you have to multiply it with 2.4 because I've got a zoom factor of 240 but it takes
these 200 pixels.
Why?
Because it can do that, because we've got enough height available in our grid here,
so it tries to fill up as much as possible.
If I were to restrict the grid height to let's say 200 pixels overall, then this would shrink,
now it's somewhere in between the minimum and the maximum
and if I shrink this even more, maybe because I add one more row which also requires some space, then
it would go to its minimum or closer to its minimum value of 10 pixels.
So minmax is another helpful function if you want to ensure that a certain cell should have a minimum
width or height but shouldn't become bigger than a certain maximum. This is just
one other feature I didn't want to hide it from you,
so this is definitely something which can come in handy too.
And of course you can also mix and match values here too,
you can mix percentages with pixels, with fractions, with auto
even, so now it would not become smaller than that but would always fill whatever is there,
otherwise something you can see if we increase the height of the width again.
So this is really something you should keep in mind and which can be very useful.